feat(typescript): add tutorial for writing policies with typescript/javascript (#663)
kubewarden/docs: docs/tutorials/writing-policies/typescript/04-validation.md

---
sidebar_label: Validation logic
sidebar_position: 040
title: Writing the validation logic
description: A tutorial on writing validation logic for a Kubewarden policy using TypeScript.
keywords: [kubewarden, kubernetes, writing policies, typescript]
doc-type: [tutorial]
doc-topic: [kubewarden, writing-policies, typescript, validation-logic]
doc-persona: [kubewarden-policy-developer]
---

<head>
  <link rel="canonical" href="https://docs.kubewarden.io/tutorials/writing-policies/typescript/validation"/>
</head>

> :::danger Critical: Don't write logging information to STDOUT
> 
> Writing to STDOUT breaks your policy. Instead, use STDERR for logging or the logging facility provided by the Kubewarden SDK. The policy's output to STDOUT must only contain the validation response.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::danger Critical: Don't write logging information to STDOUT.

Writing to STDOUT breaks policies. Instead, use STDERR for logging or the logging facility provided by the Kubewarden SDK. The policy's output to STDOUT must only contain the validation response.

:::
```

The validation logic goes in the `src/index.ts` file.

Your validation logic needs to:

- Get the relevant information from the incoming validation request.
- Return a response based on the input and the policy settings.

The incoming request contains a JSON object with the Kubernetes resource to validate.
You can access this JSON object data through the Kubewarden SDK's helper functions.

## The `validate` function

> The policy provided by the template already has a `validate` function in `src/index.ts`. 
> You can make use of it there, adding your logic to reject Pods with denied hostnames.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The policy provided by the template already has a `validate` function in `src/index.ts`.
You can use it there, adding your logic to reject Pods with denied hostnames.
```

- **NOTE 5**: Compare the hostname against the denied list and return an appropriate response.

## Helper functions

The policy uses several helper functions to process the validation request:

### getKubernetesResource

This function extracts the Kubernetes resource from the validation request:

```typescript
/**
 * Safely parses and extracts the Kubernetes resource from the validation request.
 *
 * @param {ValidationRequest} validationRequest - The validation request object.
 * @returns {KubernetesResource | undefined} The parsed Kubernetes resource if available.
 */
function getKubernetesResource(validationRequest: ValidationRequest): KubernetesResource | undefined {
  try {
    let requestObject: string | KubernetesResource | undefined = validationRequest.request?.object;
    if (typeof requestObject === 'string') {
      requestObject = JSON.parse(requestObject) as unknown as KubernetesResource;
    } else if (requestObject === undefined) {
      return undefined;
    }
    return requestObject as KubernetesResource;
  } catch (error) {
    console.error('Error parsing Kubernetes resource:', error);
    return undefined;
  }
}
```

> This function handles the case where the Kubernetes object is provided as a JSON string or as an already parsed object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function handles the case where the Kubernetes object is a JSON string or an already parsed object.
```

### getPodHostname

This function extracts the hostname from a Pod resource:

```typescript
/**
 * Extracts the hostname from a Pod resource.
 *
 * @param {Pod} pod - The Pod resource.
 * @returns {string | undefined} The hostname if set, otherwise undefined.
 */
function getPodHostname(pod: Pod): string | undefined {
  return pod.spec?.hostname;
}
```

This function extracts the hostname from the Pod's specification.

## Policy entry point

The policy uses a switch statement to handle different actions:

```typescript
const action = policyAction();
switch (action) {
  case 'validate':
    validate();
    break;
  case 'validate-settings':
    validateSettings();
    break;
  default:
    console.error('Unknown action:', action);
    writeOutput(new Validation.Validation.ValidationResponse(false, 'Unknown policy action'));
}
```

> The Javy plugin provides the `policyAction()` function indicating whether the policy should validate a resource or validate its settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Javy plug-in provides the `policyAction()` function indicating whether the policy should validate a resource or validate its settings.
```
